MALAWI Climatic shocks, economic decline and high food prices drive acute food insecurity in rural and urban Malawi   IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSISMAY 2024 - MARCH 2025Published on 5 July 2024OverviewThe populations analysed are both urban and rural and include 28 districts and four cities. Approximately 4.2 million people (20 percent of the analysed population) are expected to experience high levels of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) in Malawi in the current period (June and September 2024), including 56,000 people in IPC Phase 4 (Emergency) and 4.1 million people in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis). These populations require urgent humanitarian action to reduce their food consumption gaps, protect and restore their livelihoods and prevent high levels of acute malnutrition. An additional 6.7 million people are classified in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed) between the same period and require interventions to mitigate disaster risks and safeguard their livelihoods. Most of the population in Phase 3 or above are not able to produce enough of their own food and are dependent on market purchases for their food needs.The situation is anticipated to deteriorate during the projection period from October 2024 to March 2025 which coincides with the lean season in Malawi. The resulting impact of El Niño on crop production will exacerbate the situation further and is likely to result in an earlier onset of the lean season. In this projected period, 5.7 million people (28 percent of the analysed population are estimated to be in IPC Phase 3 or above). These people will require urgent humanitarian action to reduce food gaps, particularly for the 416,000 people in Phase 4, protect and restore livelihoods and prevent acute malnutrition.Current Situation May - September 2024Projected Situation Oct 2024 - March 2025Key Drivers1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbolsy5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map SymbolsClimatic shocks: El Niño impacted food security by causing a delayed onset of rains and prolonged dry spells that led to crop loss in the southern region and some districts in the central region. The country has registered a 17 percent decrease in maize production in comparison to last year. This has significantly contributed to decreased food availability, increased prices, and limited access to food, leading to heightened food insecurity in the affected areas.High food prices:Households with limited financial resources are finding it increasingly challenging to purchase enough food to meet their dietary needs with average maize prices being 160 percent above the five-year average but 17 percent lower than same time last year. The 2023 high cost of agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizers, and pesticides has created a rebound effect on staple prices.Economic decline: The country’s ongoing economic instability, high commodity prices, and inflation (32.3 percent year-on-year inflation rate for April 2024), is driving food insecurity, particularly in areas experiencing climatic shocks. Additionally, the import cover is below the internationally accepted standard of less than three months.1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS  2CURRENT IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY MAP AND POPULATION TABLE (MAY – SEPTEMBER 2024)1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map SymbolsKey for the Map IPC Acute Food Insecurity  Phase Classification(mapped Phase represents highest severity affecting at least 20% of the population)1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS 3Note: A population in Phase 3+ does not necessarily reflect the full population in need of urgent action. This is because some households may be in Phase 2 or even 1 but only because of receipt of assistance, therefore they may be in need of continued action.  Marginal inconsistencies that may arise in the overall percentages of totals and grand totals are attributable to rounding.Population table for the current period: May – September 2024
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS  4CURRENT SITUATION OVERVIEW (MAY – SEPTEMBER 2024)From May to September 2024, only Chitipa district will be classified in IPC Phase 1 (None/Minimal). This indicates that most households in this district can meet their essential food and non-food needs without resorting to atypical or unsustainable strategies to secure food and income.Fourteen districts are classified in Crisis (IPC Phase 3), including Balaka, Blantyre, Chikhwawa, Chiradzulu, Machinga, Mangochi, Mulanje, Mwanza, Neno, Nsanje, Phalombe, Salima, Thyolo, and Zomba. This classification means that an estimated 4 million people in these areas can barely meet their basic food requirements, and they can do so only by depleting crucial livelihood assets or resorting to emergency coping measures.In urban areas, the analysis indicates that two cities, Lilongwe and Mzuzu, are in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed). This means that the population in these cities can meet their food needs but cannot afford some essential non-food expenditures without engaging in stress-coping strategies. Meanwhile, Blantyre City and Zomba City are classified in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis), indicating that the populations in these cities can marginally meet their minimum food needs but only by depleting essential livelihood assets or using crisis-coping strategies. The primary factor contributing to the current state of stress is the increased cost of the food basket. According to WFP price data, the average price of maize staples in May ranged from 623 MWK to 650 MWK across nearly all monitored markets. In contrast, maize prices during the same period last year were lower, ranging from 469.49 MWK to 475 MWK.Malawi is facing a severe decline in staple crop production, particularly in the southern region. National maize production has dropped by 17 percent, from 3,509,837 MT last season to 2,926,190 MT this season, mainly due to extended dry spells during critical growth periods. Despite functional markets, high inflation and underproduction are driving up food prices. Consequently, 567,000 people in Chikhwawa, Neno, and Nsanje districts are now in IPC Phase 4 (Emergency), representing 5 percent of the population. Households are resorting to emergency coping mechanisms, such as selling assets, to meet basic food needs. Urgent action is needed to prevent further food security deterioration and protect livelihoods in these areas.Main OutcomesAll districts in the Southern Region of Malawi, along with Salima in the Central Region, are currently classified as IPC Phase 3 (Crisis). These areas exhibit low Food Consumption Scores (FCS), with the prevalence of poor FCS—indicative of IPC Phase 3—ranging from 55% in Chiradzulu to 8% in Likoma.Chikwawa and Nsanje Districts have the highest proportion of their populations, over 45%, in IPC Phase 3 for the HDDS. This means that households consumed only three to four food groups in the 24 hours preceding the data collection in May 2024, reflecting a poor nutritional status. Currently, the Household Hunger Scale indicates that approximately 30% of households in all districts are classified under IPC Phase 3 (Crisis). The Livelihood Coping Strategies (LCS) also show that 29% of households are employing crisis-level strategies. Additionally, the Reduced Coping Strategies Index (rCSI) indicates that about 30% of the population is classified under IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or higher, reflecting significant food insecurity.The observed outcome indicators show higher values because data collection occurred before the completion of the harvesting phase. As a result, individuals had not yet started consuming their own agricultural yields. This suggests that overall food consumption during the current period is likely to improve compared to what the initial indicators reflect.Most of the 4.2 million people in Crisis (IPC Phase 3) are in rural areas that faced crop production deficits due to prolonged dry spells in the southern Region and erratic, low rainfall in the Central and Northern regions. These rural households will have low food stock levels, forcing them to rely on markets for their food supply earlier and longer than usual. According to the IPC acute analysis, the number of people classified in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) has steadily increased over the years. In June 2019, 720,000 people were reported in crisis. By June 2020, this number had risen to 1.7 million people. In July 2021, 1.6 million people were in crisis. The 2022 analysis classified over 2.6 million individuals in crisis, and in 2023, this figure reached 3 million. In 2024, the number has further increased to 4.2 million. These findings highlight a concerning trend of worsening food security challenges due to consecutive rainfall seasons characterized by several climatic shocks such as cyclones, high temperatures and reduced rainfall. The rising numbers should also be analyzed in the context of increased units of analysis and population growth, as demographic expansion impacts the scale of food security issues.Urban Areas According to the 2024 analysis, 430,000 people in Malawi’s major cities (Mzuzu, Lilongwe, Zomba, and Blantyre) are facing high levels of acute food insecurity IPC Phase 3 or worse. This represents about 17percent of the 2.5 million urban residents in these areas.Zomba City boasts the highest percentage of its analysed population in Phase 3 or worse, with 25 percent of its 119,116 people falling into this category. Following closely, Blantyre City has 20 percent of its 885,237 analysed population in Phase 3 or worse. Meanwhile, both Lilongwe City and Mzuzu City each have 15 percent of their analysed populations in IPC Phase 3 or above. Notably, Lilongwe analyses a significantly larger population of 1,199,718 people compared to Mzuzu’s 284,880 people. Zomba City has the highest percentage but 29,779 are in Phase 3 or worse while Lilongwe has the highest number of people affected in this current period as a substantial 179,958 people in Phase 3 or worse. The primary drivers of this situation in the cities are food inflation, which hovered around 38.8 percent in March 2024 (compared to 32.4 percent in March 2023), and the November 2023 currency depreciation that caused the Malawi kwacha to drop 44 percent against the United States dollar.
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS 5PROJECTED IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY  MAP AND POPULATION TABLE  (OCTOBER 2024 – MARCH 2025)1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map SymbolsKey for the Map IPC Acute Food Insecurity  Phase Classification(mapped Phase represents highest severity affecting at least 20% of the population)1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistancecounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS  6Population table for the projected period: October 2024 – March 2025Note: A population in Phase 3+ does not necessarily reflect the full population in need of urgent action. This is because some households may be in Phase 2 or even 1 but only because of receipt of assistance, therefore they may be in need of continued action.  Marginal inconsistencies that may arise in the overall percentages of totals and grand totals are attributable to rounding.
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS 7PROJECTED SITUATION OVERVIEW (OCTOBER 2024 – MARCH 2025)Between October 2024 and March 2025, the food security situation in Malawi is projected to deteriorate significantly, with an estimated 5.7 million people expected to experience high levels of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or worse). The number of districts classified in Crisis (IPC Phase 3) is anticipated to rise to 19 out of the 28 districts while the 4 cities have the same classification. Among the 5.7 million people, 5.1 million reside in rural areas, while approximately 554,000 people are situated in urban centres, including Blantyre, Zomba, Lilongwe, and Mzuzu. These populations are in the regions affected by low agricultural productivity, prolonged dry spells, pest infestations, and diseases in crops like maize and groundnuts. Additionally, the forecasted La Niña weather conditions are likely to worsen the situation with flooding anticipated in these areas during the rainy season (November 2024- April 2025). The compounded impacts of inflation and an economic slowdown further increase their vulnerability. These factors are expected to persist, exacerbating food insecurity during the projection period (October 2024 to March 2025).In the projected period it is anticipated that the top three districts with the highest percentage of affected populations will be Chikhwawa, Nsanje, and Balaka. In Chikhwawa, 60 percent of the population will be affected, with a significant number of people in IPC Phase 3 or worse. Nsanje follows closely, with 50 percent of its population experiencing acute food insecurity, heavily influenced by prolonged dry spells. Balaka also ranks high, with 45 percent of its population affected, facing similar high levels of food insecurity.Conversely, the three least affected districts include Chitipa, Mzimba and Rumphi. All three districts have the lowest percentage of affected population at 10 percent in phase 3 or worse, having benefited from stable rainfall and increased production for mainstay crops like maize and beans. During the projected period from October 2024 to March 2025, prices are expected to remain significantly above their five-year average as both urban and rural households will early deplete their food stocks and will face the increased impact of inflation. Despite official crop estimates indicating slightly above-average maize production compared to the five-year average, production is lower than the previous year. Prices have remained significantly higher due to the high costs of inputs and global price trends. Consequently, maize prices are expected to continue trending well above the five-year average. According to FEWS NET the maximum projected price for maize is anticipated to reach K1065 per kilogram, and potentially higher in some markets. These above-average prices will likely impede financial access to food for both rural and urban households during the projection period.
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS  8In comparison with the past five years, this year has the highest number of acute food insecure population (5,692,122) followed by the 2023/24 consumption period (4,402,000), the 2022/23 consumption year (3,818,554) and the 2020/21 consumption year (2,617,986).  The projected acute food insecure populations were the lowest in 2021/22 consumption year with 1,496,394people classified in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above. This is mostly attributed to good production seasons in these seasons. In terms of percentages, this year and 2018/19 consumption year both have the highest number of acute food insecure population with 22 percent of the population in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or worse followed by 2022/23 with 20 percent of the population in IPC Phase 3 or worse. This was followed by 2020/21 consumption year with 15 percent of the population in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above, while 2019/20 consumption year registered the lowest population in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above at 7 percent of the population. The figure below shows the trend in projected populations in phase 3 or worse from 2018/19 to 2023/24 consumption years. Generally, there is an upward trend throughout the years. This is mostly on account of lower agricultural production from various shocks such as weather-related shocks.  Projected Populations in IPC Phase 3 or above: 2020/21-2023/24Percent of Projected Population in Phase 3 or above: 2020/21-2023/24During the past five years, the trend shows that among the three regions, the Southern Region has had the highest acute food insecure populations, followed by the Central region while the Northern region has been the least food insecure districts. Similarly, this year all the 13 districts in the Southern region are projected to be in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis).  The trend also shows that the three Southern region districts of Chikwawa, Nsanje and Balaka have been the most food insecure districts in the country mostly because they are rain shadow areas. All three districts have been projected in IPC Phase 3 in the past five years. In the last two years the districts have seen a rise in the population of people in IPC Phase 4 (Emergency). The situation has deteriorated in all the Central region districts with the exception of Dedza, Dowa and Ntchisi which are projected to be in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed) while the rest are projected to be IPC Phase 3 (Crisis), while during the past five years they have mostly been food secure. This is mostly due to weather-related shocks such as late onset of rains, dry spells and early cessation of rains. Trends
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS 9For the projected period, all the four urban zones analyzed (Blantyre, Lilongwe, Mzuzu and Zomba) are projected to be in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) with 553,964 people of the urban population being in IPC Phase 3. This is an increase of 18% from last year’s urban food insecure population of 470,000. This increase is mainly because people living in urban areas mainly rely on purchases for food and staple prices are projected to be higher than the five-year average as well as last year due to macroeconomic conditions and low production this year. The main drivers for the deteriorating food security situation in the urban areas are high staple prices, high inflation and high transportation costs. 
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS  10COMPARISON WITH CHRONIC FOOD INSECURITY CLASSIFICATIONKey linkages and comparisons exist between this year’s acute food insecurity classification and the chronic food insecurity results from 2022. The significant increase of acute food insecurity shown by the present IPC analysis between the productive and lean seasons is symptomatic of structural fragility, and high dependence on agriculture as main source of food and income for vast segments of the population, particularly in southern Malawi where the economy largely depends on the primary sector and  to subsistence farming. The direct impact of El Niño on food insecurity during the current period, and indirect on the projection period reveals a scarce diversification of economic sectors, limited formal safety nets and low resilience of rural populations in Malawi.  This year, all the three severely chronically food insecure (IPC CFI Level 4) districts in the country, Balaka, Chikwawa and Nsanje, have been classified in IPC acute food insecurity Phase 3 (Severe) with 45 percent, 60 percent and 50 percent, respectively, of their populations in Phase 3 (Crisis) and above. During the projected period, Balaka is projected to have 40 percent of its population in phase 3 and 5 percent in phase 4, Nsanje is projected to have 45 percent in phase 3 and 5 percent in phase 4 while Chikwawa is projected to have 45 percent in phase 3 and 15 percent in phase 4. This shows that these districts are both acutely and chronically food insecure. This is because these districts are rain shadow areas and therefore experience major climatic shocks especially prolonged dry spells and floods year in year out and this year were hit with severe dry spells whilst the districts were still recovering from last year’s Cyclone Freddy. The two Northern region districts (Likoma and Nkhatabay) with the lowest chronic food insecurity (IPC CFI level 2 – Mild) have been classified in IPC acute food insecurity Phases 2 (Stressed) and are both projected to be in IPC acute food insecurity Phase 2 during the October 2024 – March 2025 period. This depicts a situation of both low acute and low chronic food insecurity. The remaining districts projected to be moderately chronically food insecure (IPC CFI Level 3) are also projected to be acutely food insecure (IPC acute Level 3 - Crisis) except for Chitipa, Rumphi, Mzimba, Karonga, Dowa, Ntchisi and Dedza which have been classified in IPC acute food insecurity Phases 2. The main driver for both acute and chronic food insecurity is recurrent weather-related hazards and stresses which reduce food production in the country and dependence on low value livelihood strategies such as casual labour and petty trade. 1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistance(accounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map SymbolsKey for the Map IPC Acute Food Insecurity  Phase Classification(mapped Phase represents highest severity affecting at least 20% of the population)1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationea receives significant manitarian food assistancecounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessEvidence Level******Map Symbols1 - Minimal2 - Stressed3 - Crisis4 - Emergency5 - Famine  > 25% of households meet 25-50% of caloric needs through assistance > 25% of households meet > 50% of caloric needs through assistanceIDPs/other settlements classificationArea receives significant humanitarian food assistancecounted for in Phase classification)Areas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysed Urban settlementclassificationAcceptableMediumHighScarce evidence due to limited or no humanitarian accessidence Level******Map Symbols(mapped Level represents highest severity affecting at least 20% of the population)Map SymbolsRecurrence of crisis - areaclassified as Crisis or worseduring at least three years inthe previous 10 years.Urban settlement classification1 - None2 - Mild3 - Moderate4 - SevereAreas with inadequate evidenceAreas not analysedEvidence level:AcceptableMediumHigh******Key for the Map IPC Chronic Food Insecurity  Level ClassificationOctober 2024 - March 2025 period2022 - 2026
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS 11FOCUS ON NUTRITION STATUSFOCUS ON THE IMPACT OF HUMANITARIAN FOOD ASSISTANCEThe IPC Analytical framework has Nutritional Status and Mortality as second level food security outcomes.  In the foregoing analysis, the indicators used to assess the second level outcomes include Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) based on Weight-for Height Z-score (WHZ), Global Acute Malnutrition based on Mid-Upper Arm Circumference, Body Mass Index (BMI) <18.5. The indicators for Mortality include Crude Death Rate and Under-Five Death rate. Nutrition status and mortality were analysed using the results from the SMART Survey undertaken in April and May 2024 by the Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR). With respect to Nutrition, the prevalence of acute malnutrition among children aged 0-59 months based Total GAM was estimated to be within IPC acceptable range of less than 5 percent, at 2.6 percent across the country. The prevalence rates based on combined GAM (derived from WHZ and MUAC) was estimated to be at 4.40 percent for the country, with Chikwawa having the highest combined GAM rate at 7.3 percent, indicative of an alert situation in the district.  The BMI Body Mass Index [(BMI) <18.5], was estimated to be at 9.9 percent. According to IPC, this implies an alert situation where 9.9 percent of the population is underweight. The mortality, based on Crude and under Five Death Rate was estimated to be within IPC acceptable ranges, at 0.18 (0.14-0.25) and 0.08 (0.03-0.21), respectively at the country level.There is a critical gap in humanitarian aid for people facing Crisis (IPC Phase 3) and Emergency (IPC Phase 4) conditions in targeted areas. Neither the government nor key aid partners have plans for assistance during the upcoming post-harvest season (June-September). While communities typically rely on their harvests and social networks during this period, this year’s food insecurity is high. Without proper aid, these vulnerable populations will face immense hardship.Humanitarian food assistance is crucial from October 2024 to March 2025. Though not confirmed and funded, aid organizations plan to deliver critical food aid to affected populations during this period. This intervention aims to directly address the food security crisis and ensure people have enough to eat.
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS  12RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTIONResponse Priorities• Ensuring immediate humanitarian response for the population in IPC phase 3 and above.• Promoting winter cropping in areas with residual moisture and adequate water sources and facilitating the distribution of inputs during the winter season can enhance agricultural productivity and food security. Supporting farmers with appropriate inputs, such as seeds and fertilizers, during this period can enable them to cultivate additional crops and improve their overall agricultural production.• Ensuring the timely supply and distribution of inputs through the Affordable Inputs Program is vital for improving crop productivity and enhancing food security. By doing so, this program can contribute to increased agricultural production and better food availability.• ADMARC should stock adequate maize to stabilize maize prices. Sufficient grain reserves will ensure the availability of affordable food during periods of scarcity, thereby regulating prices and ensuring food security for the population.• Promoting food diversification is important for enhancing dietary diversity and improving nutritional outcomes. Disseminating key messages on the importance of diverse and balanced diets is essential for behavior change and positive nutrition practices.• Addressing feeding practices and post-harvest management is critical for reducing food loss and waste.Situation Monitoring and update• Maize prices: Maize prices are projected by FEWSNET to be significantly above the five-year average due to low production and high demand from foreign other Sub-Saharan African countries that also faced El Niño. Currently, maize prices are trending higher than the five-year average.Risk factors to monitorPrice shock: the general price increase of food and non-food commodities will pose the risk to the households in terms of food access due to loss of purchasing power and unstable supply of commodities on both local and international markets.Conflict: Ukraine/Russia and Israel/Hamas conflict may exert pressure on the prices of food and non-food commodities thereby eroding the purchasing power of the affected households. La Niña: Following El Niño there is a high probability of La Nina weather that brings a risk of high amounts of rainfall that may result in flooding and crop and animal loss.PROCESS AND METHODOLOGYThe IPC AFI Analysis workshop occurred from 20 to 29 May at Protea Ryalls Hotel in Blantyre, Malawi. A total of 50 participants attended this analysis.  These including representatives from the ministries of agriculture, livestock and water development, economic planning and development, HIV and Nutrition section of Ministry of Education, WFP, FEWSNET, FAO, UNICEF, Care Malawi, Save the Children, CONCERN Worldwide and CCLEs from Zambia, Mozambique and South Africa. Analysts were split into four regions (North, Central, East and South) with each district being independently analysed and compared with the neighboring districts in the same region. Upon completion of entries into the platform, technical consensus process involved each region presenting their results and reviewed by the facilitators, vetting of the results and then plenary discussion before the team incorporated the comments and closed the analysis. The draft report was developed by the MVAC secretariat and forwarded to the Government for endorsement. However, to have buy-in, a discussion was conducted at the districts level with main stakeholders (NGOs, government departments) to discuss the results of the analysis before the Humanitarian Response Committee begins to deliberate of the development of the Lean Season Integrated Response Programme.
MALAWI | IPC ACUTE FOOD INSECURITY ANALYSIS 13SourcesThe MVAC TWG conducted an Annual Assessment and Analysis from May to June 2024. The main surveys undertaken were HEA data collection, market assessment, rural household food security survey and urban food security survey. The main data sources used for this analysis include Household Food Security Survey, Agricultural Crop Production Estimates (APES), Price Projections (FEWS NET), Price data Ministry of Agriculture (Agricultural Market Information System- AMIS), mVAM data from WFP, National Statistics Office (population) and District Food Security reports, Smart survey (UNICEF). Limitations of the analysisThis year’s data collection was carried out in May 2024, at a time when harvesting was underway in some districts while others had not started harvesting, particularly in the Northern Region. As a result, some food consumption indicators relatively had high values. In terms of analysis requirement, the Level of evidence of this analysis, as defined by the IPC protocols, was assessed as High Evidence Level (Evidence Level 3).What is the IPC and IPC Acute Food Insecurity?The IPC is a set of tools and procedures to clas-sify the severity and characteristics of acute food and nutrition crises as well as chronic food insecurity based on international stan-dards. The IPC consists of four mutually rein-forcing functions, each with a set of specific protocols (tools and procedures). The core IPC parameters include consensus building, con-vergence of evidence, accountability, trans-parency and comparability. The IPC analysis aims at informing emergency response as well as medium and long-term food security policy and programming.For the IPC, Acute Food Insecurity is defined as any manifestation of food insecurity found in a specified area at a specific point in time of a severity that threatens lives or livelihoods, or both, regardless of the causes, context or du-ration. It is highly susceptible to change and can occur and manifest in a population within a short amount of time, as a result of sudden changes or shocks that negatively impact on the determinants of food insecurity.Contact for further InformationKang’oma Sophie MVAC Chair Email: sophiekangoma@gmail.comMzonda Venancio MVAC Coordinator Email: venancio.mzonda@gmail.comIPC Global Support Unit www.ipcinfo.orgThis analysis has been conducted under the patronage of the MVAC. It has benefited from the technical and financial support of FAO/GSU for the analysis and USAID for data collection.Classification of food insecurity was conducted using the IPC protocols, which are developed and implemented worldwide by the IPC Global Partnership - Action Against Hunger, CARE, CILSS, EC-JRC , FAO, FEWSNET, Global Food Security Cluster, Global Nutrition Cluster, IFPRI, IGAD, Oxfam, SICA, SADC, Save the Children, UNDP, UNICEF, the World Bank, WFP and WHO.IPC Analysis Partners:Acute food insecurity phase name and descriptionIPnaIPbeIrmtItmsIasleo
